---
title: "Simple Pizza Recipe"
date: 2021-04-11T09:57:35Z
draft: false
tags: ["blog", "food", "recipe", "pizza"] 
cover: "/images/food/pizza.jpg"
---
Pizza is life and everybody can cook it at home pretty easily. The key is to make it thin and crunchy and a tasty tomatoe sauce. If you can do that, you can top it with whatever you like to make it truly yours.
This recipe is very simple and can be done in any household oven without any special equipment. I use this recipe at least twice per month, because it is so easy and the result is so delicious.

## Dough
This is enough for two baking trays of Pizza.

### Ingredients 
* 500g of type 700 flour
* 1 package (7g) of dry yeast
* 2 tablespoons of olive oil
* 1 teaspoon of sugar
* 250ml of warm water

### Preperation
Mix the yeast and the water until the yeast is dissolved. Now mix that with all the other ingredients and knead it until you have a nice smooth dough.
Put it into a bowl and cover it with a dish towel and let it rest at about 30°C for about 45 minutes. Then take it out and split the dough into two equal parts, form two nice round balls and let them rest again for an hour at a warm place covered by a dish towel again. 

## Tomatoe Sauce
We use canned tomates, because they have a lot more taste than fresh ones and since we will liquify them anyway, we do not care for consistency.

### Ingredients
* 1 can of tomatoes
* 100ml of olive oil
* 1 teaspoon of salt
* 1/2 teaspoon of pepper
* 1/2 teaspoon of sugar
* 1 tablespoon of oregano
* a few leafs of fresh basil

### Preperation
Put all of the ingredients, except for the oregano and the basil, into a small pot and heat it to max until it starts to almost boil. Stir it during that, so it does not get burned on the bottom. 
Now put it away from the heat and blend it until it is a smooth sauce. At last add the oregano and the basil leafs and put it back onto your stove, but at very low heat for about 15 minutes. Also stir it from time to time while it simmers. After that just set it aside and let it cool down.

## Let's make Pizza
Preheat your oven to as hot as it can be. In my case this is 250°C. It is really important that the oven has already reached that temperature before you put the pizza in!
Take one of your dough balls and roll the dough out on backing paper or a silicon backing sheet - these are awesome btw., because they do not stick - until the dough covers the whole backing tray. It should be a really thin layer of dough now.
Put half of the tomate sauce on it and spread it equally all over the dough. Now put it into the hot oven and let it bake for 12 to 15 minutes. The exact time depends on your oven, just wait until you get nice big bubbles that get dark brown on their tops.
Now put it out of the oven and top it with wather you like. Yes, i do not bake the toppings, because I do not want to burned it. 
One simple topping would be Prosciutto and Mozzarella with a few fresh basil leafs, but actually you can put whatever you like onto the hot Pizza. Be creative!
